

========= Second Preface =========

It is now a little more than three years since Hans Petter asked me to help him finalize this book on finite element methods. Obviously, I was honored, but also aware that this would be a significant commitment. That said, it did not take long for me to decide. A main reason was that the first book I read about finite element methods, in the late nineties, was Hans Petter's first book about finite elements and the software library Diffpack. His book was precious to me for many years. In particular, it combined interesting mathematics and skillful programming with detailed examples that one could play with and learn from. The Diffpack library and the book have had widespread influence and many of today's finite element packages are organized around the same principles, FEniCS being one example.

This book is in many ways similar to Hans Petter's first book. It is an introductory text focused on demonstrating the broad, versatile, and rich approach of finite element methods rather than the examples where a rigorous analysis is available.  However, a lot has changed since the nineties: There are now many powerful and successful open source packages for finite elements in particular and scientific computing in general that are available. Hence, students today are not expected to develop their codes from scratch, but rather to use and combine the tools out there. The programming environment is also different from what it was in the 90s. Python was an obscure language then, but is now the dominating language in scientific computing which almost all packages provide an interface to. Hans Petter, with his many excellent books on scientific programming in Python, has been important in this transition.  However, it is still important to develop codes from scratch to learn all the gory details, even though there are advanced software packages that are available. That is;  “programming is understanding” as Kristen Nygaard put it – a favorite quite of both Hans Petter and me. As such, there is a need for teaching material that exposes the internals of a finite element engine and allow for scrutinous investigation in a clean environment. In particular, Hans Petter always wanted to lower the bar for introducing finite elements both by avoiding technical details of implementation as well as avoiding the theoretical issues with Sobolev spaces and functional analysis. This is the purpose of this book. 

*Acknowledgement*
Many people have helped with this book over the years as it evolved. Unfortunately, I did not discuss this process with Hans Petter and neither did we discuss the acknowledgement on his behalf.  

Johannes Ring and Kristian Hustad have helped with many technical issues regarding DocOnce.  
I have received comments, advice and corrections from Yapi Achou, Svein Linge, Matthew Moelter, and Murilo Moreira.   

Finally, I would like to thank Nancy, Natalie and Niklas for their support and for providing excellent 
working conditions during the writing of this book. 
 




\noindent
{\it Oslo, March 2019}  \hfill  {\it Kent-Andre Mardal}

